# European Parties 2017 II

Since 1999 researchers from The University of North Carolina estimate party positions on European integration, ideology and policy issues for national parties in a variety of European countries through experts surveys. For this project, I am going to use the most recent one, the 2017 Chapel Hill Expert FLASH Survey (CHES). According to its website, this is a reduced survey that focuses on a smaller set of EU member states. The survey asks all the standard questions on EU placement, economic and social party positioning. In terms of policy issues, the survey focuses on the key questions facing Europe in 2017 – EU economic coordination, populism, and migration. Instead of using the individual answers from experts, I am going to take the dataset that contains the mean results for each party.

## Previous analysis
On a previous analysis (see the other repo), relevant descriptive statistics were provided for this data set. Some of the most important insights obtained were: 


## Party-level conclusions
There is a positive correlation between being a more traditional/authoritarian/nationalist (TAN) party than a green/authoritarian/libertarian one and supporting a restrictive policy on immigration.
Conservative and radical TAN parties score highest on their position supporting tougher restrictions for immigration.
Greens and radical left parties, are more pro-immigration.
Parties that are identified as more right in economic terms tend to be restrictive regarding policy immigration. 
Restrictive immigration policies appear to be a general trend among European parties. 
Liberal, socialists, agrarian/center, green and regionalist parties have a strong and positive position towards the EU.Green parties seem to have larger differences between them on their support levels.
Radical TAN parties, radical left and confessional parties tend to be more anti-EU. 
There are two liberal (Partido Democrático Republicano (Portugal), Sloboda a Solidarita (Slovakia)), two regionalist (Democratic Unionist Party (UK), Lega Nord(Italy)) and one socialist party (Labour Party (UK)) that are considerably more anti-EU than the rest of the parties in their political family.
Parties that were part of the government in 2017 in their countries had on average more positive positions towards the EU than those which did not (with only two outliers).
Parties that were part of the government in 2017 were more in favor of strengthening the restrictions on immigration than those parties that were not.

## Country-level conclusions
Although in average German parties are more in favor of a strong restriction to immigration than parties in Spain, having a strong position towards immigration has a positive impact in vote shares in Spain. In the German case, being in favor of stronger restrictions has a small but negative effect on the votes obtained.
Despite their particular geographical positions, parties in Sweden and Italy have a similar position regarding immigration policies. However, in Sweden, the variance is higher, which indicates that there are parties there that are more in favor of lower restrictions to immigration than in Italy.
In Sweden a right party in economic policy terms, is not necessarily linked to strong positions regarding immigration.
In Spain, Estonia and Hungary, almost all the parties have a pro-EU position. In Estonia and Hungary there are two important outliers EKRE and Fidesz. The large spectrum covered by political parties in France, Italy and the UK might be an indication of the public opinion division regarding the EU.
In Slovakia, voters tend to look for left parties, but public opinion is inclined to strengthen the restrictions for migrants.
In Portugal, voters seem to be less radical in terms of left and right positions, and seem to have a common opinion not strenghtening meassures to migrants.
Poland’s citizens are divided between pro-EU and anti-EU, with a higher share for Pro-EU and right parties.
In italy, the vote was splitted between three parties that clustered in a not-so-radical left right position, but that differed substantially on their opinion towards the EU.

## Discussion and conclusions
### PCA analysis
Machine learning techniques such as PCA, can be useful to identify parties’ positions in regards to important topics in the agenda. Particularly, PCA provides an excellent (and fairly intuitive) visualization on the positions of parties taking into account different positions at the same time. Nowadays, with the amount of information and the speed with which it comes, it is hard for citizens and voters to actually identify which are the stands of the parties in multiple topics at the same time. If it is already hard for voters to identify the positions of one party across several topics, its even harder for them to compare the different parties in terms of their positions. Providing voters with this kind of charts and information, would empower them. With these tools, voters could have more clarity on who are they voting for and can demand more accountability from their representatives once in power.

### Deep learning model
The application of deep learning techniques to social sciences is still very new. This opens the door for exploration and testing. In this project, it was shown that deep learning can be useful to predict voting outcomes for European parties based on their positions towards sensitive topics such as migration, pro/anti-EU, budget, economic policy, and others. Even though the mean absolute error was relatively small, a 5% change in the voting share might define an election. Nevertheless, this model has limitations. For example, the data was trained for different years, in different countries. For so, if we would like to predict the share of votes in the next elections only based on this model, the acurracy would drop, since political events and economic circumstances evolve. This might change what the majority of people think and want regarding certain topic. In any case, it is a good example on how deep learning might be helpful for political science. It is worth metnioning that in a near future, this kind of models can imporve with more and better data.

### Ethics
At the begining of his book “The Signal and the Noise”, Nate Silver says that “…before we demand more of our data, we need to demand more of ourselves”. This phrase is important to have it in mind at all times. A good data scientist or professional working with numbers must be critical of the kind of information she is working with and the patterns that are coming out from it. In the case of the PCA analysis, the classification of parties and their positions is made by aggregating the subjective opinion of experts and scholars about them. No matter how well educated the assessment or guesses are, people have biases and might interpret a public declaration or written manifesto in different ways. For example, what might appear as very anti-EU stand for one expert, it might appear as a moderated one for another. If we provide charts like the one generated by this project’s PCA analysis, we have to be aware of its bias due to the personal stands of the experts who are classifying the parties. On the other hand, this problem can be curved by increasing the number of experts and diversity among the group. Moreover, since the information shared in the news and communication channels regarding political parties is already biased, this type of charts can be offered as a new source of information, increasing transparency, engagement and accountability.

Finally, regarding the deep learning model, since it was based on the same dataset, the potential ethical issues are the same. However, there are some additional concerns that might be worth mentioning. If models like this evolve and get better, political parties might be able do calculations on which political stands would yield more votes. Thus, political parties might be tempted to modify their stands to perform better in the ballots, regardless of what their core voters are asking from them. Although parties can be regarded as rational entities who survival and power depend on the number of votes, this should not dictate their core values. Minorities could eventually become even less represented, and ideological opposition among parties might become diluted. This effect would be bad for democracies; specially in a moment in which its own foundations are already being constanly challenged.
